The bibliography of Fyodor Dostoyevsky (1821  1881) comprises novels, novellas, short stories, essays and other literary works.
Raised by a literate family, Dostoyevsky discovered literature at an early age, beginning when his mother introduced the Bible to him.
Nannies near the hospitalsin the grounds of which he was raisedintroduced Dostoyevsky to fairy tales, legends and sagas.
His mother's subscription to the Library of Reading gave him access to the leading contemporary Russian and non-Russian literature.
After his mother's death, Dostoyevsky moved from a boarding school to a military academy and despite the resulting lack of money,[1] he was captivated by literature until his death.
Dostoyevsky started his writing career after finishing university.
[2] He started translating literature from Frenchwhich he learnt at the boarding schoolinto Russian,[3] and then wrote short stories.
With the success of his first novel, Poor Folk, he became known throughout Saint Petersburg and Russia.
Vissarion Belinsky, Alexander Herzen and others praised Poor Folk's depiction of poverty, and Belinsky called it Russia's "first social novel".
[4] This success did not continue with his second novel, The Double, and other short stories published mainly in left-wing magazines.
These magazines included Notes of the Fatherland and The Contemporary.
Dostoyevsky's renewed financial troubles led him to join several political circles.
Because of his participation in the Petrashevsky Circle, in which he distributed and read several Belinsky articles deemed as anti-religious and anti-government,[5] he and other members were sentenced to capital punishment.
He was pardoned at the last minute, but they were imprisoned in SiberiaDostoyevsky for four years.
During his detention he wrote several works, including the autobiographical The House of the Dead.
A New Testament booklet, which had been given shortly before his imprisonment, and other literature obtained outside of the barracks, were the only books he read at that time.
Following his release, Dostoyevsky read a myriad of literature and gradually became interested in nationalistic and conservative philosophies and increasingly sceptical towards contemporary movementsespecially the Nihilists.
Dostoyevsky wrote his most important works after his time in Siberia, including Crime and Punishment, The Idiot, The Gambler and The Brothers Karamazov.
With the help of his brother Mikhail, Dostoyevsky opened two magazinesVremya and Epochin which some of his stories appeared.
Following their closures, most of his works were issued in the conservative The Russian Messenger until the introduction of A Writer's Diary, which comprised most of his worksincluding essays and articles.
Several drafts and plans, especially those begun during his honeymoon, were unfinished at his death.
Diary articlesDostoyevsky wrote 221 Diary articles (excluding short stories listed in the respective section above) within two periods.
The initial 1873 works were published in The Citizen, the editor of which was Dostoyevsky, and from 1876  1877 the Diary was self-published.
The English titles of the following list of works are extracted from Kenneth Lantz's two-volume translations.
A Writer's Diary is a collection mainly of essays and articles, which also include, for example, answers to readers, introductions, etc.
, making the Diaries a journal-like book written and mostly edited by Dostoyevsky.
List of initial Diary articles, issued in 1873:Other articles and essaysDostoyevsky wrote articles and essays outside the Diaries collection.
These include the 1863 travelogue Winter Notes on Summer Impressions, in which he satirised and criticised European life.
[58] Other articles were written in response or as a criticism to a literary work, a person's view, requests to the military during the imprisonment period, announcements, notes and explanations.
Some of them were written for different journals or almanacs.
