Our editors will review what youve submitted and determine whether to revise the article.
Our editors will review what youve submitted and determine whether to revise the article.
Russian literature,  the body of written works produced in the Russian language, beginning with the Christianization of Kievan Rus in the late 10th century.
The unusual shape of Russian literary history has been the source of numerous controversies.
Three major and sudden breaks divide it into four periodspre-Petrine (or Old Russian), Imperial, post-Revolutionary, and post-Soviet.
The reforms of Peter I (the Great; reigned 16821725), who rapidly Westernized the country, created so sharp a divide with the past that it was common in the 19th century to maintain that Russian literature had begun only a century before.
The 19th centurys most influential critic, Vissarion Belinsky, even proposed the exact year (1739) in which Russian literature began, thus denying the status of literature to all pre-Petrine works.
The Russian Revolution of 1917 and the Bolshevik coup later in the same year created another major divide, eventually turning official Russian literature into political propaganda for the communist state.
Finally, Mikhail Gorbachevs ascent to power in 1985 and the collapse of the U. S. S. R.  in 1991 marked another dramatic break.
What is important in this pattern is that the breaks were sudden rather than gradual and that they were the product of political forces external to literary history itself.
The most celebrated period of Russian literature was the 19th century, which produced, in a remarkably short period, some of the indisputable masterworks of world literature.
It has often been noted that the overwhelming majority of Russian works of world significance were produced within the lifetime of one person, Leo Tolstoy (18281910).
Indeed, many of them were written within two decades, the 1860s and 1870s, a period that perhaps never has been surpassed in any culture for sheer concentrated literary brilliance.
Russian literature, especially of the Imperial and post-Revolutionary periods, has as its defining characteristics an intense concern with philosophical problems, a constant self-consciousness about its relation to the cultures of the West, and a strong tendency toward formal innovation and defiance of received generic norms.
The combination of formal radicalism and preoccupation with abstract philosophical issues creates the recognizable aura of Russian classics.
The conventional term Old Russian literature is anachronistic for several reasons.
The authors of works written during this time obviously did not think of themselves as old Russians or as predecessors of Tolstoy.
Moreover, the term, which represents the perspective of modern scholars seeking to trace the origin of later Russian works, obscures the fact that the East Slavic peoples (of the lands then called Rus) are the ancestors of the Ukrainian and Belarusian as well as of the Russian people of today.
Works of the oldest (Kievan) period also led to modern Ukrainian and Belarusian literature.
Third, the literary language established in Kievan Rus was Church Slavonic, which, despite the gradual increase of local East Slavic variants, linked the culture to the wider community known as Slavia orthodoxathat is, to the Eastern Orthodox South Slavs of the Balkans.
In contrast to the present, this larger community took precedence over the nation in the modern sense of that term.
Fourth, some have questioned whether these texts can properly be called literary, if by that term is meant works that are designed to serve a primarily aesthetic function, inasmuch as these writings were generally written to serve ecclesiastic or utilitarian purposes.
