SL4Scheduled Papers in Slavonic StudiesThis paper is available for the academic year 2023-24.Russian literature came of age in the nineteenth century.  Within a few decades (1810s to 1860s), authors went from struggling to develop and refine the literary language, to writing some of the greatest novels of all time.  Beginning with Pushkin and the Golden Age of Russian poetry, this course traces the evolution of the Russian literary tradition and the rise of the great Russian novel, culminating with its heyday in the 1860s-70s, and then the return to shorter forms at the end of the century.  Students will learn how Russian authors engaged with formal/aesthetic problems and also made literature the site for rich debates about all the pressing concerns of their day: social, psychological, political, scientific, and philosophical.In order to achieve a balance of depth and breadth, the paper is organized around the study of two set texts and four topics. (There are suggested pathways through the texts and topics tailored to Part IB, option A [ex-ab initio] students).Assessment by Long Essay instead of final examination is available in this paper for students in Part IB (Options A&B).For full details, see the SL4 Student HandbookSection A: Set TextsA1.  A. S. Pushkin, Evgenii Onegin  (Michaelmas)Note: Former ab initio students (i.e. those in Part IB, Option A) are only required to read chapters 1, 2, 7 and 8 in Russian; they must read the entire novel in English in order to follow the plot.  (Recommended translation: James E. Falen (rhymed); in addition, Vladimir Nabokov for literal translation)Students in Part IB, Option B and Part II read the entire novel in Russian.A2: L. N. Tolstoi, Anna Karenina (Lent)Note: Former ab initio students (i.e. those in Part IB, Option A) read at least the extracts specified below in Russian (roughly one third of the novel); they read the entire novel in English in order to follow the plot:  Part I: 1-4, 7-11, 13, 16-23, 26-34;  Part 2: 7-12, 21-29;    Part 3: 1-5, 13-16,  22-25, 31-32 ;  Part 4: 1, 3-5,  9-13, 15-23;  Part 6: 3, 7-16,  19-20, 31-33;  Part 7: 9-16, 23-31;  Part 8: 8-19.  Recommended translation: Richard Pevear and Larissa Volokhonsky.Students in Part IB, Option B and Part II read the entire novel in Russian.Section B: TopicsB1. Lyric Poetry (Michaelmas)Selected poems by Vasilii Zhukovskii, Konstantin Batiushkov, Aleksandr Pushkin, Mikhail Lermontov, and Evdokiia RostopchinaB2.  Exposing the Need for Reform, 1850s (Michaelmas)Evgeniia Tur, Antonina (1851)Aleksandr Ostrovskii, Groza (1859)Nadezhda Khvoshchinskaia, ‘Bratets’ (1858), Pansionerka (1860)B3. The Novel of Ideas, 1860s (Lent)Ivan Turgenev, Otsy i deti (1862)Fedor Dostoevskii, Zapiski iz podpol’ia (1864) or Prestuplenie i nakazanie (1866)B4. Short Forms, 1880-1910 (Lent) Selected short stories by Anton Chekhov, Lev Tolstoi, and Nikolai LeskovPreparatory reading: Students are urged to buy and read both Set Texts during the summer (or Year Abroad), as well as, in particular, any optional longer texts they wish to cover (e.g. Prestuplenie i nakazanie).Students are urged to buy and read both Set Texts during the summer (or Year Abroad), as well as, in particular, any optional longer texts they wish to cover (e.g. Prestuplenie i nakazanie).The following reading list serves as an introduction to the subject.Weekly lectures in Michaelmas and Lent; weekly (2hr) revision seminars in Easter. Ten fortnightly supervisions throughout the year.  For the SL.4 Moodle site, please see here. Assessment by Long Essay instead of final examination is available in this paper for students in Part IB (Options A & B).  Students for Part IB (Options A & B)A 5-hour online timed exam. The examination is structured as follows: Section A will consist of a commentary on one of the set texts and essay questions on the other. Section B will offer several questions on each of the prescribed topics, as well as more open questions that might be answered with reference to a wide range of texts and periods.  All questions in Section B will require candidates to write about at least two texts.  Candidates must answer three questions:•     1 question from Section A•     any other 2 questions (which may include 1 further question from Section A) Students for Part IIStudents will write a coursework essay or commentary in the break before Easter Term based on prompts about the set texts (the equivalent of Section A of the exam for Part IB students).  In Easter Term there will be a 3-hour online timed exam. During the exam students will answer two questions on the topics (the equivalent of Section B of the exam for Part IB students).     Book Announcement: 'Multicultural Commonwealth: Poland-Lithuania and Its Afterlives'21 November 2023We are happy to share news of the publication of ‘Multicultural Commonwealth: Poland-Lithuania and Its Afterlives’ (University of Pittsburgh Press), edited by Professor Bill and Professor Dr Simon Lewis, with contributions by Professor Bill and Dr Olenka Pevny.

      View all news    
© 2024 University of Cambridge